# DgmlBuilder

## Description
DgmlBuilder is a small `DotNet` library for generating `DGML` graphs without having to know all the details of `DGML` (the Microsoft Directed Graph Markup Language). Visual Studio contains a powerful, interactive `DGML` viewer that is used mostly for displaying code structures of your Visual Studio projects. Despite the powerful viewer, the `DGML` format is not so much in use for other purposes. It is also a bit difficult to use. The aim of `DgmlBuilder` is to make it more easy to represent your (graph-) structured data in `DGML` such that you can use the Visual Studio `DGML` viewer to display, analyze, and interact with your data.

## How it works
`DgmlBuilder` operates on a collection of objects and turns these into collections of nodes, edges, styles, and categories, based on a given set of builders.

### Builders
Builders are specific classes that you write to convert objects in your model to specific graph elements.

The following builders are supported:
* `NodeBuilder` These are builders that construct graph nodes from objects in your model. For instance, if you have a type `Component` in your model with `Name`,  `Id`, and `ComponentType` fields, you can transform these into corresponding nodes with the following node builder:
    ```csharp
    new NodeBuilder<Component>(
        x => new Node 
            {
                Id = x.Id,
                Label = x.Name,
                Category = x.ComponentType
            });
    ```
    As we'll see shortly, you can define multiple node builders for different types in your model. For instance, if your model also contains `Interface` as type, you can instantiate a specific node builder for this type too.
* `EdgeBuilder` These are builders for constructing edges in your graph. For instance, if there is a `Call` relation in your model to represent methods calls from one component to another, you could instantiate an edge builder as follows:
    ```csharp
    new LinkBuilder<Call>(
        x => new Link
            {
                Source = x.Source,
                Target = x.Target
            });
    ```
* `CategoryBuilder` These are builders for adding containment to your graph. For instance, to put all your components inside their containing module.
* `StyleBuilder` These are builders for applying visual styles to your nodes and edges. For example, to use different background colors for components and interfaces.

While each of the above builder types generates a single node, there are also methods available to generate multiple nodes at once. E.g., you can create an instance of `NodesBuilder` for elements in your model for which you want multiple nodes in the resulting graph. Likewise, to generate multiple links at once, you can instantiate the `LinksBuilder`class.
## Using DgmlBuilder
To use `DgmlBuilder`, you instantiate `DgmlBuilder` with the builders you need. The basic setup is like this:
```csharp
    var builder = new DgmlBuilder
    {
        NodeBuilders = new NodeBuilder[]
        {
            <your node builders>
        },
        LinkBuilders = new LinkBuilder[]
        {
            <your link builders>
        },
        CategoryBuilders = new CategoryBuilder[]
        {
            <your category builders>
        },
        StyleBuilders = new StyleBuilder[]
        {
            <your style builders>
        }
    };
```
As you can see, all builder properties of `DgmlBuilder` are collections, allowing you to specify multiple builders for each.

The `DgmlBuilder` class supports two `Build` methods:
* The first, simply accepts a collection of objects:
    ```csharp
    public DirectedGraph Build(IEnumerable<object> elements)
    ```
* The second supports multiple collections:
    ```csharp
    public DirectedGraph Build(params IEnumerable<object>[] elements)`
    ```
Both build methods will apply the configured builders to all elements and produces a `DGML` graph as output.

For example, if you have your components, interfaces, and calls contained in separate collections, you can generate the corresponding `DGML` graph as follows:
```csharp
var graph = builder.Build(components, interfaces, calls);
```

The resulting `DGML` graph is a serializable object. This means that with the standard .Net serializers you can save the corresponding graph to disk. E.g., as follows:
```csharp
using (var writer = new StreamWriter("my-graph.dgml"))
{
    var serializer = new XmlSerializer(typeof(DirectedGraph));
    serializer.Serialize(writer, graph);
}
```
You can now open the file `my-graph.dgml` in the `DGML` viewer of Visual Studio to inspect and analyze the graph.
## Graph analyses
The graphs produced by `DgmlBuilder` so far are pretty straight-forward graphs with nodes and edges. However, more powerful graphs can be generated by having `DgmlBuilder` execute graph analyses. These graph analyses can be 
passed as constructor arguments to `DgmlBuilder`. The `DgmlBuilder` library contains two pre-defined analyses: 
* `HubNodeAnalysis` resizes each node depending on the number of edges connected to that node. This gives a clear visual representation of important nodes in your graphs. 
* `NodeReferencedAnalysis` marks unreferenced nodes in the graph with a special color and icon.

To use any of these and your own analyses, pass them to the constructor of `DgmlBuilder`. E.g.,
```csharp
   var builder = new DgmlBuilder(new HubNodeAnalysis(), new NodeReferencedAnalysis());
``` 
## Create custom analyses
To create your own analysis, you create an instance of `GraphAnalysis`. This class has the following three properties:
```csharp
public Action<DirectedGraph> Analysis { get; set; }
```
Set this property to your analysis action. It receives a `DGML` graph as input. The analysis method typically decorates this graph with additional attributes. The `DGML` model as defined in `DgmlBuilder` supports adding your custom properties to edges and nodes. These will be converted to XML attributes during serialization. To add a custom property with name `foo` and value `bar` to a node `n` you can use the following code:
```csharp
    n.Properties.Add("foo", "bar");
```
To use such newly created properties in DGML (e.g., by referencing them in styles), you first have to register the property in `DGML` (see below). As an example, the action of `` performs is defined as follows:
```csharp
    foreach (var node in graph.Nodes)
    {
        var isReferenced = graph.Links.Any(x =>
            x.Target == node.Id && x.Category != "Contains");
        node.Properties.Add("IsReferenced", isReferenced);
    }
```
It iterates over each node in the graph and adds the property `IsReferenced`. Note that containment links are ignored.
```csharp
public IEnumerable<Property> Properties { get; set; }
```
Your analysis typically decorates the graph with properties which are not present in `DGML`. With `Properties`, you can declare additional properties to `DGML`. E.g., `NodeReferencedAnalysis` adds a boolean to mark a node as referenced. To that end, the following property is declared:
```csharp
    new Property
    {
        Id = "IsReferenced",
        DataType = "System.Boolean",
        Label = "IsReferenced",
        Description = "IsReferenced"
    }
```
This declares the property `IsReferenced` of type `System.Boolean`.
```csharp
public IEnumerable<Style> Styles { get; set; }
```
Your analysis will typically not only decorate the graph with computed properties, but also add styles to the graph to give some visual appearance of the analysis. With the `Styles` property any additional style can be added. Styles are defined as `DGML` styles. E.g., `NodeReferencedAnalysis` registers the following conditional style:
```csharp
    new Style
    {
        TargetType = "Node",
        GroupLabel = "Unreferenced",
        ValueLabel = "True",
        Condition =
            new List<Condition>
            {
                new Condition {Expression = "IsReferenced='false'"}
            },
        Setter =
            new List<Setter>
            {
                new Setter
                {
                    Property = "Icon",
                    Value =  @"pack://application:,,,/Microsoft.VisualStudio.Progression.GraphControl;component/Icons/kpi_red_sym2_large.png"
                }
            }
    }
```
This style adds an icon to nodes for which the property `IsReferenced` equals `false`. More information about creating custom (conditional) styles can be found at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/modeling/customize-code-maps-by-editing-the-dgml-files.
## Examples
[GitHub](https://github.com/merijndejonge/DgmlBuilder/tree/master/src/examples/TypesVisualizer) contains `TypesVisualizer`, a small tool to visualize a collection of types in DGML. It demonstrates most features of DgmlBuilder.

## More info
* Source code of `DgmlBuilder` is available at [GitHub](https://github.com/merijndejonge/DgmlBuilder). Nuget packages are available at [Nuget.org](https://www.nuget.org/packages/DgmlBuilder).
* `DgmlBuilder` is distributed under the [Apache 2.0 License](https://github.com/merijndejonge/DgmlBuilder/blob/master/LICENSE).
* [Directed Graph Markup Language (DGML) reference](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/modeling/directed-graph-markup-language-dgml-reference).